Good morning. Welcome to today's lecture. So I'm very told you I think that today we are going to focus on once one computation quantum computing. Why are we doing this?
So to start with a small spoiler. So quantum computers are not from the, from the point of view of quantum algorithms. So which algorithms can you run on quantum computers?
Quantum computers don't allow speed ups for the algorithms that are needed for AI training. So I training, as you know, works with neural networks. Nowadays, most of the, at least the AI training that is, that is, you know, gaining traction.
Among the general public, that's trained using, using so-called neural networks, and they can't run on quantum computers, but they can be run more efficiently than on a normal computer.
And so, but why are we still looking at because we believe it's very important trend and so you should understand it.
So,
so we last time I was here in March where he spoke about computation. I would like to take up this once more, but last time I used for computation I use as a paradigm.
The
search approach was recursive functions. Now I want to do Turing machines as well just quickly, because I think it's very important paradigm to understand and then we will talk about logic gate based computation quantum mechanics and quantum computing.
And my goal is so is to allow you as philosophers to understand it and also as computer scientists for those who are computer scientists to understand enough of quantum mechanics, not as a mathematically but at the, you know, more verbal level of description so that you can get the basic idea of how quantum computers function.
And it. So, um, we saw last time already that if you want to understand agents need to understand models computable algorithms and complex systems and, and today we're going to speak and try again about computation.
So, I think Barry spoken about this at length right about models and modeling.
Yeah, so just to remind you. So what we are doing when we are programming computer, no matter what is supposed to run the it's a model in the sense of science.
It's a representation of an aspect of reality using abstract symbols that is created to describe explain or predict the aspects of reality in question unless it's a purely mathematical task by calculating a huge prime number.
If you calculate a huge prime number then that's not a model of reality.
And then that that is something else which we can't discuss now but most models that are put into computers are models of reality.
And we say that a model is adequate if relative to some set of requirements, it can be used to engineer an entity or an emulation that satisfies the requirements like an Airbus A320 satisfies of the requirement of transporting a certain amount of weight or passengers and cargo.
Over, you know, the Atlantic, for example.
And synoptic model is a model of a system that can be used to engineer given system or emulate its behavior.
So, now what's a Turing machine.
So, Turing asks, what is a computable function.
And his answer in 1937 or 36 was a mathematical functions computable if an algorithm can be formulated that performs this functional Turing machine.
And so if the algorithm P computes a function F, which maps T to N with T element of the set N exponent K.
And if P is the value F of N1 to NK upon the input N1 to NK element of T, after finite number of steps, then it is computable.
And it cannot yield an output if you input a vector so this, this is a vector like vector N1 to NK.
And this is within T, which is a domain of the computation that won't create an output. So, for example, if you give GDPT an image, it can't do anything with it, because its domain is language and also mathematics actually.
It can't use images for quite a while. He I think it's called is a neural network that is that that has its domain images so you can give it. No, it has I think it's domain text, and it creates images.
And, and but I think you can also give some of these programs an image and take create an alternative version of this image.
And so that, so that just says that the computability requires a domain for the function to work on this is very this is super important slide I actually didn't think of it when I wrote the slide but.
But what you can see from this last statement here is the narrowness of all AIs, because whenever I get an input that is not an element of the set of its domain, it will just fail.
And so all AIs put by this definition, all AI algorithms that can ever exist are always made for a certain domain.
Right. And if, and if you get outside this domain, it will not compute.
And so, and so I think with this slide alone, you can already refute the notion of general AI, because humans don't work like this right humans can always take vectors of input from a domain that they have not been prepared for.
Also animals can do this and that is what is called natural intelligence, but computers can always only compute something for the set of the domain of computation for which they were prepared.
So, the Turing machine is a model of a computable function, a universal Turing machine can compute all computer functions so this is the universal Turing machine this is universal Turing machine.
This inside there's universal Turing machine right so all your, your, your mobile phones and computers yes they are universal Turing machines.
So, the Turing machine is a tape divided into cells each cell contains a symbol from some finite alphabet zero usually zeros and once the alphabet contains a special blank and one or more other symbols.
There's a head which is called Q here that can read and write symbols on the tape and move the tape left and right and one and only one cell at a time.
And in some models the head moves at the tape station that doesn't matter.
There's a state register that stores the state of the Turing machine one or finitely many among these is the special start state with which the state register is initialized.
The finite table of instructions that given the state Q one, the machine is currently in at the symbol a one it is reading on the tape so right now this.
The head is Q one is reading the symbol zero.
And it's reading the symbol and tells machine what to do next.
Either erase or write a symbol, and then can can move the head.
And so, so this is how it works.
And here you have the simple Turing machine that doubles the number of ones it reads and inserts a zero between the two series of ones.
So, it's defined by these parameters here M equals and then there's a series of symbols.
And Q are the states of the machine. Sigma capital Sigma is alphabet input alphabet gamma is the tape alphabet.
And, and these this is and so this, if you look at it it has a delta has a state transition function that lets the machine move from one side to the other.
So the machine will replace a one one it reads on the tape by a one one one zero on one. So it doubles the ones it reads and separates them by zero. That's all it does.
And to do this you have on the student doing machine you need, as you see here six states.
And here we see what it does. So, the, the, the tape it has to work on is prepared to have two ones and three zeros and at the end.
If you see here it will have two ones zero and two ones, and then it stops.
But so that's, that's all it does.
Sorry, and, and let's, let's see how this works so in state as one, it, it actually reads the one.
And then it, it replaces it by a zero and moves one step right. So you see here it has replaced it by zero is now in state two and has, has moved one step right.
So in step in this now it reads a one and it's, it's staying, it's staying in in state two, but then it moved but it moves on one to the right by moving one to the right.
It was he it gets here. Right. So now it reads a zero.
And it moves one further to the right.
And here it, it's, it reads a zero it's now getting it getting into into into stage three and so on. So this basically this the state transit it's called a finite state automaton.
And the finite state automaton describes what the tree machine does, and it perfectly determines its behavior. So you could now give it, you know, the tape was a million ones, and a million and two zeros, and it would then move through this algorithm.
As long as it would take it to fill the whole tape was another million ones and leaving two zeros. Sorry, one zero in the middle.
And so, and so this is, and all computers are like this, only that the finite state automaton that is used is of course much bigger than this, you know, but every computer can be in the end reduced to a combination of such finite state automata and even so
even, even, even if I, if I have software running here, ultimately, this, when I program software in the high level programming language like here I have.
I think it's called.
It's a some C dialect and Objective C. So if I program for the iPhone with Objective C, I create ultimately many many finite state automata that work together to accomplish such computations.
And, and we will learn a bit later how this basically works at the level of the electrons at the level of the bits. And, and so, so this is just basically all you need to know just that the want to close the door.
Thank you.
It's basically just that, that it gets more and more complicated with bigger Turing machine, but they all work like this in every computer that can be that exists, including quantum computers can be represented, which are with such finite state automata.
It's just not done, because they get bigger and bigger and more complicated but basically to improve that this is the case.
I have here an example of a, of a finite but not computer function which is non recursive.
And, and so, so when the functions non recursive you learned last time when I was here that cannot be computed all Turing machine. So it's on computable and it's called the busy beaver function I will not go through it now, because when I wrote this lecture I didn't realize how much work it was to teach you quantum mechanics.
I need more time for quantum mechanics, at least, you know, one or one. So I will skip this but in the, but you can read this it's a super interesting problem was invented by, by Tiborado a mathematician.
And it's, it's very very funny. It's, it's very funny.
Look how simple the Turing machine looks and it can't compute. It can't finish it's, it's just, it's just super and, and I go I expand quite well here you then you have one.
How it what it does how it works, you know its job is to put to put the whole table of ones.
And it's just so funny. And, and here you see that it becomes uncomputable and why. So it's a super cool problem.
You have to work on it yourself, you will enjoy it and it's, it's the nice thing about it that you don't have to be a mathematician to understand it, but it shows you really clearly why many problems are not computer not computer but I just, I just have to have to skip it.
So I want to show you now before we move to quantum mechanics.
How logic. So, and we have any questions on this Turing machine model with the finite set automaton.
I mean, if you if you study computer science you are you write the test about it. It's not too easy. And then they give you, they give you for example a piece of, of, of sort of code to the code and then say write down the sequence of finite set automaton to achieve the pseudocode so it's, but you get the principle I think
right. It's just if you want to apply to save it gets a bit tricky but it's, it's just, you know, in the end math. So, so now getting to to the logic gas computation so you have to, the idea of of of by of the binological
was was invented. The first to invent this was a German called Conrad's. And at the same time Americans were trying to do a hexadecimal computer, which you as a computation basis 16 16 bits.
Right, so to experiment for and, and, and there is there are hexadecimal is an important principle today in computation, but it's only used in high level but the lowest level the computations are all bit to bit computers.
And so the each bit can have a zero and a one and Conrad's also realized that this was, was easiest to do because, because you can, because for true reasons you can use binary not binary digits which have had invented by another German called Leibniz, you've heard of him.
And, and, and he realized that he could use the binary digits and he would use electricity.
And so the first computation machine he built was was that rework that was put into production had, I think, 503 of four hertz. So it could do for computation.
It had a clock of four computations per second.
And as we will see that the parallel suffices to add to numbers.
I think you need a few more steps to do this we will see it a bit later, but, but, but it, it, but it worked and then very soon he built also electronic versions and then of course IBM start to build electronic version and so on.
But basically the idea is that you're using Boolean logic to to program the computer and you see it here.
So, this, this, this Boolean logic is called logic gate.
And so, if you take it so here you see an example of logic gate, it's an end gate will just, it's called gutter in German that's from the German media.
I often use, use illustrations of the Germany because it is, along with the Russian, the best for mathematics.
It's just that I can't, I don't know any Russian.
And, and, but I always look at the French, the German and the English version to select which one I should take and often the German is the best.
So, a logic gate is, is an idealized or physical device that performs a Boolean function, which is logical operation performed on one or more binary inputs that uses a single binary output.
So there is a mistake here but I won't correct it now.
So the end gate, right.
It's, it's basically taking. So if you have fear current and no current here, you have one zero, then you will have no current output here.
Because this was a transistor. If you put no current in both you will not have currently either. If you put current in both you will have current and so on so the transistor is set up in a way to basically to basically implement this truth table.
Right. So that you get only one if both of the, of the inputs are one.
So if you have an OR gate gives you, it gives you a electricity on this wire output channel when with one of the channels is has current on it. Right. So, so, and, and if you have now many, many of these logic gates you can build a micro circuit.
And of many micro circuits you can build a microprocessor. So in the end, in here, we have millions hundreds of millions of gates combined to make up the processor that is working.
And, and so this is a multiplexer.
And the multiplexer, and it has a truth table. Right. So how does it work.
It has a control signal called as zero. It has an input one and input two and output. And you see here that the control signal decides on on what is done with the input signals.
And basically, it's a data selector that select between several input things and forward to select the input into a single output line.
So, if the, if this control signal set to zero, you see the output here will only be easy role. But if it said to one, the output will only be one.
So basically suppresses based on the control signal suppresses one of the input channels and only put forward the other channel. So it's a way of basically selecting which channel should, should, should move on.
And, and, and so here, it's quite easy. You can see if, if this is zero and they're both zero, then the output will be zero, and so on. For example, if this is one, and you want is zero, this will be zero.
If you want is one is will be one and here's a simplified truth table. It just says, if a zero is zero, then you will have the, the value of easy as output. If a zero is one, then you have you want it out.
Right. And so, and this is a symbol the official symbol used in in circuits to describe it.
And, and it's made up of an and not at all gate.
So, so you have three gates that you need to put together. And so this truth table is basically what you get when you train together and not on our gate.
So you can see it all the examples how these small logic circuits or these logic gates are put together to create one small circuit.
And it's all about, you know, deciding how to which electrons should should move out here.
So the multiplexer is a very abstract, but everybody has used an adder, right, which is just if you type into your pocket cash, the three plus four and it puts out, it puts out a seven.
And, and this adder works like this. So it combines an exclusive or and an end gate.
So an exclusive or is, is the gate that it does this.
So if you have two inputs a and b, what output do you get so if you have zero and zero, it will be zero. If you have one and one, it will be zero.
If you want only if either of them is one that's why it's all right.
And, and all as computer scientists all saw, and the other is, is has of course this truth table.
And this one is like the Latin way.
Right. That's why it's always also in the military music.
And this one is like out, out.
Which means either one.
And, and so if you if you have now the two inputs here I am B, then you have the, the, the carry bit and the output s.
And you see, if either of them is one you will get a one here but if they're both one, you get a zero, but you will get the carry bit.
The carry bit will be put into the next adder to remember that you have over flown the bits of the of this unit and propagate this into the next adder so that you can get then what children one day.
So when you learn the cherry bit is just this, you know, when you do this.
You don't have a carry bit in the digital in the 10 digit system. But if you do this year.
Then I, well, but we can still do it.
Get to put yourself a small one here.
Then you, because we have 11 and then you have this, it's easier to see when you do this.
You know,
then you get the one year you get the one year you have to add the one year then you get the two year.
Sorry, we had one year and two and then two.
Right so this is how to carry over bits.
And basically this circuit was to see it gives you a carry over bit.
And so this is how the so and you can see here really nicely how it's made of an exclusive or and and and and and and gate.
And so this is pretty so so this is pretty nice, I think.
And the full adder.
This is just when you take. So this is, this is made of a this is the most elementary XOR and and get so these are the basic logic gates.
This is now one half adder and now if you put two half adders together and combine them with a with an OR gate, then you get the this table, which which is called the full adder.
Right and so basically with this you can build any processor because all the other calculations multiplication division and subtraction can be modeled on the on the addition.
Right. So, so addition is just addition.
Subtractions and addition with a negative integer might be getting so many many additions.
So three times five times five times five times five and division is just inversion of multiplication.
So, so now you've understood basically how computers work.
It's really it's really that simple.
It's just that the circuit.
And so, and it's fascinating when you talk to specialists who have as it is a profession.
They say, oh, you know, I had a friend working at Intel and she said, oh, you know, it's so annoying this morning again one of them mathematicians came to me.
She was from England.
She was one of them.
And, and, and very knows what I mean.
It's just certain socially, they want to come to me and wanted again to have something that is not cannot be realized in binary logic.
Why don't they get it.
I thought they were mathematicians.
It was so funny. And basically, the trick is to imagine how you can put mathematical operations in this format cleverly, so that you can get efficient computation.
And here you see just for completeness, how complicated you can get.
See this defines the output. That's a lot of the formula best in the proposition logic.
And this year is the is the aspect, which is a sum.
And which you see it's this is awesome.
And we will get back to the symbols. They're very important. You want to ask the question.
Yeah, so these
I'm just wondering, I understand the logic of these days.
But how is this done in the engineering in this actual circuit board, there is a set of predecessors that is set up to be an actual day or yes.
Yes, this is set and then afterwards you need to when you're doing the software to computer you're getting it or use these two ancestors to calculate this.
Yes, this is this is the lowest level code is about this.
The lowest level code is when the compiler gives out the instructions for the transistors or the circuit and all the circuits and the second element of the processor.
But the programming language is of course exactly correct. Right.
But when when you program for example in in C or C++ or any other high level language, ultimately when it gets compiled gets informed into machine code that tells it transistors, tells it processor what to do.
So, in principle, if you build a very simple computer that just has to add her, then you wouldn't make it that you need to have this compiler.
But in principle, if you just want to addition, just a written.
Yeah, you wouldn't need a programming language.
Yes. So, so how do you tell that this was true by putting electricity in the circuit.
You just tell them this but you just put it and then they do what what this circuit does just as a pattern does it and so if you want to have addition.
And you have an adder then you have to put electricity on the circuit in a certain reason. And that was the clock of the computer does.
It gives the reason of the pilot of the electrons, and then they moved in this reason through the circuit, and then then the calculations automatically performed.
And this is a deterministic device, it can only do that, it will always do that.
It's fascinating. And, and the idea that that was an Englishman for a change, Charles Bevin, he was the first to have this idea that you can set up such deterministic, you know, circuits, he did, and he designed it to be mechanical.
Right, so his idea was to do this in a mechanical way, but the gates were the same, they were just realized not as electricity but mechanically and, and so, and so even like this had already thought that the machine could be built.
Based on this principle and so it's, it's, it's not one wants to understand it's not so hard, you know, and yes, we don't need all this overhead if you at the very first one of the very first models, they were just taking mechanical points.
So he was simulated and said dry was throwing in points, because we're dropping in slots and then the machinery of adding was performed, and he had several slots indicating the value of the digital ones to add is through into coins and then they got added.
You know, and all this was mechanically realized that the compile there was a compile it was just the order wasn't by dropping the slots into the chorus, the consequence lot.
And but, but, but I think it's still the same. It's just that now there's so many the circuit there's so many micro micro circuits and so many millions of of of of gates that I added but that's basically how it works.
So, the story about chat GPT is told, according to which, if they just printed out the next most likely syllable, then you would get too much repetition.
And so to avoid repetition, they added a little spot of indeterminacy or randomness to the output. How do you get randomness.
If everything is going on, it's very, it's very simple that you're somewhere in the circuit.
You're so you build a random generator. There are many ways to be a random generator the best ones are using extra radioactivity.
But there are also other ways to be a random you can also do it with software so that you can make circuits that reduce random numbers they are not as perfect so if you if you analyze the output over long periods of time you can find patterns.
And if you look at a few outputs they create quite they actually simulate randomness quite well. And so then you basically somewhere in the circuit you put in the randomness.
So this is in the injective the randomness is created by answering the, I think, but nobody knows but I think that the most likely way I think it works is that the input is slightly modified every time.
And then the model itself, the core GPT format is totally deterministic, but if you slightly add to change the input of course with a different output.
That's why, that's why when you give the same input to JetGPT several times you get different answers. But I think if you do it over a long period very long period of time you will also see a pattern arising.
So, so, so, so how can it be that that an algorithm that that does something that JetGPT is actually with the value of such a computer architecture.
Well that's because JetGPT is one merely a very long equation. It's a very long computable equation and it takes a certain input.
The use of the symbols of the letters that are input are transformed into numbers and numbers are plugged into the big equation. Then the equation is computed using using using the regular CPU or GP was a regular CPU for for the operation of the equation.
So it's just computed like like this, you know, so it's just a deterministic equation. It's a stochastic model, but once the equation is set up it's just a deterministic equation running on a normal true English universal true machine.
Great question.
Yeah, so the machine will compute.
And also that seems random what it's really happening is that it's compressible into a function that is machine to that point.
Yeah, so it is also random generate as a Turing function.
And unless it's a real random, so sometimes you need a real randomness, then you use quantum, then use use quantum physics or use radioactive decay and radioactive decay gives you a true random pattern.
And so if you look up random generator, random generator, you find all the different concepts and also as the holy grail of random number generation of course, because that's a true random phenomenon.
So if you need that, then you use it and transform the signals given out by the physical random generator into into electron into put it into such a circuit.
Then you have a true random element and and random so computation with randomness is very important so by doing computations randomness on conventional computers, you can be you can actually get polynomial approximation to quantum computers for many many
problems. That's why why there's so little left to do for quantum computing, because now they've managed to find so many clever ways of using conventional computers to do things that thought that where it was thought at the beginning of quantum computing that
there's a big difference between the conventional computer at the quantum. Now this has shrunk.
And that's because because, for example, by introducing randomness into into conventional computing, you can you can eat up some of the advantages of quantum computing.
So, so I think this is pretty satisfying, isn't it, because now you know basically how this works. And you, I think as a philosophy you don't have to know at all how certain special circuits are now set up to do something.
It's just to know now how simple it is, you know, you just put electricity on this phone and this one this one then you get automatically you get the additional it's quite it's quite nice.
And it all works because of the Boolean logic that was an Englishman to by the way we define it first.
Boolean. Yes, Boolean.
Yeah, and I'm sorry, Brit, Brit.
Yeah.
Okay, I give up.
It's so complicated. So, so this is this is all I wanted to tell you about computer data. I didn't do it last time I think it was important, because it really really clearly shows you what is going on.
So now, to understand quantum computing. So, until when do we have this morning Barry to 12 so when do we have the first
So, so anyhow, so, so, so I want to explain to you how quantum computers work and I think you can, you will be after that you will be able to understand it at the level we just understood.
Yeah, I think we have the computers, I think which would be already quite a lot, quite some good. So let's start. So but to do this we have to start with quantum mechanics.
So, so I still want to talk to one o'clock so we do the first break at 11 for 15 minutes and then then we do the rest.
Okay. So, so I will try to not to add to do as little mathematics as possible.
I want to introduce some mathematical concepts so the very very important phenomenon is, is a wave, because the Schrodinger equation is a wave equation so you need to, we need to go through a bit little bit of mathematics and physics.
So, if you have here to pure sound waves, one with frequency causing those 10 piety and the other one was because it's a piety.
You will get a superposition and if you. So if you have two chords of an instrument that you, that you, how do you say this, that you stimulate to make a sound like on a piano.
You have hammers hitting on calls.
Yeah, but that's it.
Yeah, but I don't even know what the right unsubstant what the right English word for this is but anyhow.
Yeah, hit you just hit.
So, so if you hit on the piano to cause of pure, they are not, but if they were pure frequency, then you would have you get superposition.
And this, what's happening is that that because this one is 10 to 10 to eight. And so, so you get them superposition of them so they add up, but here they cancel each other out because this year you see it's positive and this one is negative.
And then they cancel each other out so that you don't get much signal here, and then they start to add up again here they're both positive and they're in sync.
And so they get high signal here they're slightly out of sync so you get less signal, you understand the way it works right. It's just adding up the frequency.
So, and every, and so by doing this you know the beats. So this creates beats when you get beats in music, they're created like this.
So this is this is just just to remind you of waves. Okay.
And now, let's look at the classical one of the experiments that that led to the discovery of quantum mechanics.
So imagine that you have a gun here that that is shooting particles on a wall that has two slits.
And if you if you shoot the bullets and now measure here you have a detector to measure where they arrive.
And you have one slit closed, then you get of course this distribution because you get most bullets hit here and then less here and less here, because of the way they move through the slit.
The slit determines this pattern. And so here you have very few and the most are here, more or less right behind the slit. And the same is two for the second set so this is what you see when you basically have one of the slits closed.
Now if you open both slits.
And you have these bullets.
Then you will get just an addition of the two waves as a pattern.
Right. And this is, this is called. So the probability distribution of detecting P12 bullets fired against the wall with two sets equals the sum of the properties measured in each slit, just the sum of the two distributed.
Now if you have a water source here now you tap into the water regularly with a small hammer, you will you will get this in relation to what the water was.
Now you have to sit again and the detector here. Now you see something fascinating if you if you close one slit, you get this pattern or this pattern which is the same as a pattern you get with the bullets.
But if you open both slits, you get what is called interference.
This interference is like the interference I shown here. Yeah, so they, so they, they add up and create a pattern that is doesn't look at all like just add an up to two probabilities, because they sometimes cancel each other out and so on.
And that creates a strange pattern. And so, so for a wave source to measure the interaction of the wave pattern resulting in interference pattern with the way with a different wave intensity is just not the sum but it's actually the sum of the of the absolute.
And, and if you if you calculate this out you get according to trigonometry you get this. So here the angle between the two waves is so to speak determining one of the terms, and, and so on.
So the data is a face difference between the two way. Right. So here was 8 to 10, the face difference.
And that that's what creates the interference and now.
So this is just not yet quantum mechanics is just to remind you what's happening when you have wave interference.
So, we have the first, now let's go through the principles of quantum mechanics. The first principle is that the probability that a particle starting at s arise at x is a square of an amplitude, the amplitude is written like this so this particle as should arrive at x and this
is written like this, and, and it's just a complex number if you calculate it.
And so, so, and so if you take this value and square it's absolute then you get the probability, and the value itself is just called the amplitude it's called the probability amplitude.
It's a bit irritating that has historically reason why it's called amplitude but it's not it's, it's only the likeliness that s will arrive at x.
And so just one important things for quantum mechanics, you also need to understand imaginary number. So this is the gauss imaginary number space.
You see it has a real axis, and there's an imaginary axis and doing that you can represent square root of minus one.
And, and so here you have the coordinates on the real axis and the point C is is x. So that's this plus the imaginary number times y.
And this gives you the coordinates in this Gaussian imaginary number sphere, and was it Euler.
Yeah, I think Euler didn't present it like this, but, but he implicitly use and Gauss formalized it, and Euler was a Swiss guy by the way, and, and, and this is the complement.
So if you exchange the plus sign here on this y axis by a minus sign, then you get the complement and we will use the complement all the time later on to just can imagine that the complement of an irrational often of, of, of an imaginary number
is called an imaginary number. It's complement is, is, is this the was the bar and, and I is just equal square of minus one.
So that's how you can imagine the small I square root of minus one.
Okay.
So, I still don't know what amplitude is amplitude is just the, the
the relationship this term the direct term X bar as it's called bracket as X, it's as bracket.
This bracket just means the likelihood that s arrives at point X, and we will see it in on the next slides. There's a good explanation, you will just see it graphically.
So, so but before we go back to this bracket notation, we look at Heisenberg's uncertainty principle.
Everybody here has sort of the uncertainty principle right and I want, there's an explanation of the uncertainty principle that you can understand without mathematics almost without mathematics and I want to, I want to show this to you, because because later on with quantum computers.
We also see how important it is to understand the uncertainty principle.
So, so suppose we have a serious fit and politics are coming from very far away with a certain energy.
So, coming far away that means that they, they have the essentially the same energy and that horizontal.
So they all have a horizontal momentum P zero in the classical sense classical when that's from Richard Feynman, when he says clearly always means classical physics not classical music.
And, and so the particle is moving neither up or down because it came from a very, very fast force.
So the whole vertical momentum is lost. Right. So it's now only moving horizontally. This is by the way one, one of these instances of what's called Nancy guard right called physical theater.
Right. So you prepare you make you want to make a statement in physics.
So you tell long story that justifies your assumptions. That's the theater. And then you have the great thing evolving and all.
And so, so it doesn't move up or down just moves from left to right. Now the particle comes, comes out through the hole.
We know that position vertically.
It's, it's only in the range of B because B is the size of the slit.
And now the uncertainty of its vertical position is in the order of, of B delta y.
So, and now we might want to say since we know the momentum is absolutely horizontal.
We might think that delta P y is zero but that is wrong.
Well, we once knew that the momentum was horizontal, but we don't know it anymore.
Because before the particles pass through the hole, we did not know their vertical positions.
Now that we have found the vertical position by having the party that comes through the hole, we have lost all information on the vertical momentum.
And because according to the wave three, there is a diffraction of the way as they go through the switch, just as for light.
Therefore, this pattern is spread out by the diffraction effect where the fraction means that particles can hit here and then they get like it was shown here.
You know, they can rebound like this from the corners of the slit. And so this means that that we basically we are losing the information about their vertical position.
That's super interesting. Right. So the spreading out through this and this is by the way, this is from a dialogue between Einstein.
And I don't know needs more. So it was some of the great theoreticians was contradicting to the, to the, to the, to the uncertainty principle of height.
I think it was an Einstein came up with this. And it's very funny because they walked really in a parking lot in or somewhere and he explained to him like this with the slit was losing the information is really, and then later, later, he wrote the letter to him again.
And we still have this letter and so finally loses his letter.
And he just as he also described, it is so great how Einstein was thinking that he just, you know, the other one was challenging, but it just came up with this experiment and it's so beautiful.
So, so now we have lost information about, about the vertical momentum. So you know what momentum is right momentum is is mass times times.
So it means that that it determines it determines how hard this bottle will will hit against this object for example this and then it will pass on some of the momentum to this microphone and so on.
And so the momentum is lost and now we can detect this diffraction is a particle count and when the counter receives the particle say here.
This is the momentum in order to get from this blitz up to see. So the vertical momentum P y has a spread which is equal to P zero times delta tether where P zero is a horizontal momentum.
That's just trigonometry. And now you can can calculate how big the spread out pattern is it's delta P y equals P zero times lambda divided by B.
We have lambda as the wavelength. And if we make B smaller and make a more accurate measurement of the position of the particle by making the slit smaller.
The diffraction pattern gets wider because if B is below one, then of course, because it's in the denominator then the whole expression gets bigger.
So the narrow we make the slit the wider pattern gets and the more the likelihood that we would find the party less sidewise momentum sassy uncertainty in the vertical momentum is inversely proportional to the uncertainty of why.
And in accordance to quantum mechanics, the wavelength times a mentor is a plan constant.
So we obtain the rule that the uncertainties in the vertical momentum and in the vertical position have a product of the order of the plan constant. So, so if you multiply this.
So this is the uncertainty expressed as a product.
And, and this is greater or equal to the plan constant divided by two.
And so this principle is always valid in quantum experiments no matter which mutually read properties of a particular measure.
And so this will be very important for quantum computers data on because it actually means that if you want a bit, which is the equivalent of the bits. So here we saw that is a bit.
That's incomplete. That's not incomplete. That's not complete and so on. We will have some similar bits in quantum computers.
And they are called quantum bits and to get the such operators here that operate on bits that are called quantum gates and not any more logic gates are called quantum gates.
These are called logic gates because they operate according to the rules of proposition logic. And in one mechanics, they will be called quantum gates and and of course, when we have an output here.
We want to know what it is to measure it.
When something comes a bit after quantum computation we want to measure a bit. And then when we measure it we can always only get a zero and a one. Nothing else.
And, and we will later on see why this is the case. What this has to do with the uncertainty principle but now I derive the uncertainty principle for you.
And, and I think this was Einstein's way of doing it. There are many, many other ways to derive the uncertainty principle and it applies in many places, but this is the simplest one.
And it was made by Einstein. It's funny because Einstein on the walk made a contribution quantum mechanics.
It's quite a full story. It shows how he thought, you know, and, and I think he also made with the EPR paradox on he made the most deep statement about quantum mechanics.
He made though I just wasn't participating in inventing quantum mechanics. He was witnessing it for decades, you know, I mean, Trdinger came out with the equation 26 Einstein died in 55.
And so, and so he was for 30 years he was commenting on it. And he made the observation that quantum mechanics incomplete and we will get back to this.
So, now let's look at what.
So quantum mechanics, the principle of uncertainty without understanding other questions to this.
Why is because you introduce it on this slide, but you don't say what why.
So why is just the, the vertical place.
So, so this is, this is the, this is a vertical place and this is a vertical momentum.
And it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's an imperfection of the slides due to because I was when I wrote this so in this that I, and it's so clear always in physics when you just have the letters x y and z it's just location right.
So, and this is, this is so this is the location is a momentum.
And yeah, so it's I say it here, vertical momentum and so this is vertical momentum this vertical position.
Now, now the doubles it so now we don't have to this year was a gun with small bullets, the classic like a classic gun but tiny bullets may be made of aluminium.
Now we have a gun that shoots electrons.
And so, so we have again a wall with some slits we have the detector we have a backstop and then now we measure the close the two and we measure and we get this pattern, and we do the inverse closest and we get this pattern.
So now the, the, the electron gun behaves like particle, because you measure the pattern that you would measure with small aluminium bullets.
Now if you open both slits, it looks like a wave, because we don't obtain this anymore.
But we obtain the pattern like with a wave, but wait a minute we have short we short particles with the electron gun, we can create such a gun right.
So this was when this was observed for the first time, they were almost desperate. They couldn't believe it.
And, and, and I made this joke already last September once the Germans could everything of all of us in Germany.
There was only one quantum physicist was working Germany but not German, a major one and then was another French one.
And Iraq was a French one that was a Danish one all the other were German. So the Germans could figure to still figure this out, but for the general theory of relativity they needed to do.
But this they could figure out, because they could use their classical physics. And so, so when electrons with classical physics we got as part of the fight against the wall, the probability of detecting the electrons which wants to close is just this, but the probability
of the distribution is not the sum of the two detected intensities as with the bullets, but instead the pattern looks like a wave interference pattern, which you remember has this equation with the cosine term.
Right. And so, and so.
So it seems that the electrons be like behave like particles was only once it but like where we suppose this was the second important experiment which could not be explained using classical physics.
So now, now let's go to the second principle when the event can occur in several alternative ways, the probability amplitude for the event is the sum of the probability amplitude for each way considered separately.
So, so this is, this is both holds open is this amplitude plus this amplitude, but you have to, you have to square this, so the interference and
Yeah, so here you see it again. So I don't know why I have two slides here but this is just showing this that that that if you close the slits.
Now, now both sets are open now you get this pattern. And this is computed like this.
And now we also start to understand so very now you understand this notation. So you see, this is the likelihood of of getting from S which is here to x which is here.
And so, and so now what you can see also what is very important is that you have to add this likelihood to go through one from S to one to X to the likelihood to go from S to two to X, and then square it.
Right.
If an experiment is performed which is capital of determining whether one or another alternative actually taken the probabilities of the event is a sum of the value for each alternative interference is lost.
Right. So here, if you if you close one of the slits, you can, you can, you can lose it, you lose the interference.
And here again, if you have now several tools slits, this is super important to understand quantum mechanics.
Now we want to understand the likelihood of going from S to the character X, and we have put your two walls. So now we have, we want to we have first to see.
We have the possibility of going from S to one, then from one to a, and then from a to X, that's one path to go from from S to X.
And then the next path which goes from S to one, then to be then to X, and then we have the next one which goes from it's not shown here, which goes from S to one from one to see and from C to X.
And so you see, now you can write this in an elegant way was a was a was a was a some sign, something over the two holes in the first wall, and then the three holes in the second wall and then you can see, you can put it now you put in all the combinations
here so you put E for one, and then you put.
So you have a one here and a one here and now you put a for alpha, and then B for F and then C for alpha you get the three first possibilities, and then you do it and then you get all the possibilities of going through this.
And so you have to find the probability of going from S to X, we have to, you have to identify all the combinations and sum them up.
And this is, and this is basically what what also happens in quantum computers in a way so so quantum computers.
And if you look at advanced quantum mechanics, then you have an integrated, because then you're not anymore looking at discrete past but you're looking at a continuum.
Right, but the beauty is, I can save you from the integral today, because quantum computing doesn't need the internet.
So quantum computing is this artificial world and artificial machine that that only looks at discrete states like you do it here. So this is a super do you understand this.
You understand this slide not the quantum computer stuff.
Yeah, you will see this is just a preview you will understand that but do you understand this first part that you have to add all the different paths together to get the total probability right.
And so this is this is this is what is done, and, and you will encounter this rotation very often now.
So now you see the explanation of the direct representation. This is one explanation. The real one is with it with a complicated integral but but this is what I showed last September but I won't show it.
Show it here because it makes no sense.
We would lose too much time.
So, so, how do we calculate the amplitude that we swear to get the probability so if you have two locations are one or two and the particle movement I wanted to as well as properties.
The magnitude, probably getting as a way with a wave number equal to the momentum divided by edge. So this is basically this, this shows you how to calculate this probability.
So you, you take the exponential function, you have the, the e from the unreal from the complex numbers, you have, you have momentum.
You have this distance divided by the plan constant and then you normalize it by this distance. And this is the probability of moving from I want to express in a in an amplitude so that's a proper amplitude.
And you can see why amplitude comes from because that is like what you get when you decompose sign and cosine into the exponential function you get this exponentially expression.
So, so remember the oil equation you all know the oil equation just shows you how you can decompose sign and cosine into into the exponential function.
And actually, this is just exponential function style of expression of the sine curve. So that's why it's the amplitude because it, and it depends of course, on the momentum.
So, so, so if you have a lot of momentum the amplitude will be higher. Right. And then you will, and then, and then, and then, and then this value becomes higher, and then you have a higher likelihood of coming from our one to our two with a high amplitude.
And so, and so this is the way it's a classical relationship between between the momentum and and mass which is the kinetic energy.
Now, now comes the next super interesting experience so the experiment was done already in the 19th century but for a very long time nobody could explain it at all.
And then there was another experiment. And now I'm skipping Max Planck's contribution, which was, which was, which was the quantization of electrons which was the being of quantum mechanics in 1905, but I'm skipping this because we can we don't have the time here, and I'm jumping ahead.
So I need to say this. So Max Planck has discovered that the electrons are not situated around the nucleus in atom in a continuous way, but that they are have probability levels, which are fixed.
These are the probability levels of the electron and if you look at the modern electron model, or an atom model, we know it's like this, that we have, that we have different levels at which the electrons may be that's a lithium or atom with three electrons and three protons.
And they can be at different levels of, of distance from from the, from the nucleus. And if they're more away from the distance they have higher energy levels.
And Max discovered that when the electron drops down, then a certain quantum of energy like it's emitted, and that this light is proportional not to its continuous function, but to a discrete function, quantum, the quantum of energy, not a continuous value.
So he didn't relate to great British physics had described a law that would use a continuous bunch. And it didn't work. It was incompatible with with reality. And so Planck looked at this experiment again and by great inner pain as he wrote to a friend, he had to accept as a continuous non continuous value nature.
Because basically physics always assumed that everything is continuous like the laws of Newton, you know, laws of motion.
And that is not suddenly a discrete amount that is there was all that's why for quantum, because there's a quantum of energy level.
So, so this was already known. But, and there were some, you know, I've been had also worked on the on the problem with, with his model of particle motion.
So there was already some stuff was done. But, but quantum mechanics was still not really kickstarted, you know, though Planck had already invented the electron quantization 1905, there was no quantum mechanical equations.
There was one that he had invented. Now, Sharon and Gallant and Frankfurt at the University of Frankfurt, they made an experiment where they, they had an oven that could create silver atoms.
So with a lot of heat they could evaporate the silver atoms. And then, then the silver things could move like this through a hole.
So we inside the vacuum of course so that they would not be disturbed. And then there was a big magnet was a strong flux upwards, the flux is made by making the magnet like this.
And then you know,
and the business medicine that electromagnetic.
What's wrong with me this morning. So anyhow, they were already the laws of electromagnetic system, allow you to build such a magnet that has a strong magnetic field upwards because of the shape of the magnet.
And so, sorry.
Thank you.
Maxwell's equations allow you to construct this, this magnet. And, and so, and so then they had a glass plate and the silver atoms were flying through this magnetic field.
And, and then they detected the deposits of the silver from this beam on the glass plate. And they expected to have a smear.
This is what I have indicated here in red. So classical physics was a continuous vertical component of, of the angular momentum would lead to vertical smear but they observed two points.
They were shocked. They were shocked, you know, because, because they thought that angular momentum. So why is, why are the, why are the silver atoms at all distorted by the magnetic field.
Because they have angular momentum themselves the egg types more magnets.
And so there are some sets. That's also why in iron you can have a man, if you put a magnet against iron the iron bar becomes a magnet itself because all the, the, the atoms the iron atoms have themselves as a sense of tiny magnets.
And they all arranged and sets in the same way so that you then then they become like a magnet, you know, every child knows it.
So, and so, so they saw that, that, that, that this property this property of being is more magnet which is called angular momentum would, would be continuous but it was, and then somebody realized that this was like with the quantization of the electrons in Planck's equation.
Right. And so, so they said, oh, this, this property that makes the students like magnets must also be discrete like the electrons on the screen.
So they discovered this.
And, and then they, they called this property the spin.
And, and spin is, is, is a, is a property of, of particles that lets them behave in a certain way magnetic field spin.
There's no translation.
And, and so it's maybe.
So I show you.
I don't need the English page but my browser set in a way to always show the German way one first but we'll go to the English now.
So, they call it an intrinsic form of angular momentum carried by elementary particles and sus by composite particles such as blah blah blah and that spin of one of the two types of angular momentum in quantum mechanics the other being orbital angular
momentum, the orbital angular momentum operators, blah, blah, blah, you don't need to. So basically, the spin is, it says the existence of electron spin angular momentum is inferred from experiments such as Zangala experiment.
But that's all we know about spin.
Right. So we have a mathematical model, mathematical model of spin we call it angular momentum.
But that's only because it's an energy to classical physics but as finally says, we don't know what spin is.
We can imagine it. Yeah, we just have we just have a mathematical model of it, which which is super accurate, but we don't know what it really is. It is what makes the electrons or the atoms fly in a certain way in the magnetic field.
That's all. But how it works, we don't know, we can't imagine it actually, you know, all the geometrical analog analog, we have our wrong.
This is the way to use our common sense view of the world to measure what spin is. Spin is just this, the behavior of the particles in the magnetic field. And this is, this is fine.
And this when I when I realized this very that was the idea of how I realized that nobody can explain what's been released. Then I found my uncle was asked what spin said exactly this.
Oh, I don't know nobody know.
So anyhow, let's continue here.
Do I still present the presentation on the screen can check.
Good. And so now you can with this he indicates the strong magnetic field in one direction this this is called flux.
And which is called this is the nappler operator that that is used to describe such a field and physically don't have to look at it.
And to you see now a different type of atom that is split into three beams.
So this is so silver split into two but atoms of spin one split into three beams.
And oh, let me look up so just for completeness what atom is has been through one.
And how I
the particles are divided into those which have been one and spin off and so on.
Yes.
Yes, please.
And, and, and so but there are atoms which have been one and they can be, and they can be split into three beams.
Now, if you see here, now we can imagine different standard apparatus, which has here inversion of the magnetic code.
So first it has no cells.
So the flux, and then the flux goes into the other direction and then it goes back to this direction.
So we are changing the direction of the flux in this experiment and now you see that in the first apparatus, we split the
beam into three and then we can put it together again in this apparatus.
And then, and then
it's changed in this apparatus and then put it together again here.
So, and now you can, you can imagine to put several such machines which are able to split and unify the beam.
So this splits and unifies the beam.
Now you can imagine that you put several of these in series but you can now put in a filter.
For example, for example, when you put, you have the first of these apparatus machines with a filter that filters out the minus and the, and the, and the negative and the zero spin beams of the office of the split beam.
You only get this and then if you put the second in here, only the plus will arrive.
Right.
And so, and so now you can develop a kind of, you know, alphabet to describe these machines.
So this would be a machine that splits and reassembles the, the atom beam.
This would one that splits it and reassembled it but that filters out to zero and minus.
This one filters out plus and minus this one filters out plus and zero.
And now you can say, you can calculate the amplitude to pass the various combinations of pure filters, and you can express them in matrix notation.
So here, this is the start state is the end state and now you want to know the likelihood of starting in plus as an ending up in plus as so this would be, we put, we put these two filters here in a row.
And then determine the likelihood that the iron that this beam, the plus beam is ending here. So there would be a second filter here. And that's of course one.
Why is it one because, because now after this filter I only have spin plus atoms left.
And when they go through the second apparatus, they are not hitting any obstacle right or even if there would be an obstacle here that gets through.
And so now you can have a matrix telling you the likelihood to pass from such a filter machine.
So for example, the likelihood to get from minus s to plus s is zero and the likelihood from zero s to plus s also so you can only get with such a symmetric apparatus, you can only get from plus s from the same as to the same as.
And you can also rotate the filters, and see, put the Stan gala filters in series, and then you get even other probabilities for the particles to pass through the filters.
And so now you can written, we can write.
Yes, this matrix that that describes how the particles goes through the filter. And now you can express this in terms of the likelihood of a particle to go from one state to another state.
And these states are now, and now remember that we had the some already here.
Right, this is the sum of going through both filters.
Or this was the sum. I meant this one, this sum of going with a certain path through both of the filters. Right. And now we can apply to these types of filters as well.
Let's say, so I have a certain, I go, I have, I have now let's say my three holds. And so now I have the probability of going from three to hold one and from hold one to he, and then hold two and hold three and if I three holds and I will have all the possibilities.
And, and, and, and this is, this is basically represented also as a matrix. So we said that with the filters we just saw we can only get from the same as to the same as, which means that only that in this matrix, when row and column are unequally have zero probability.
And when row and column have the same, we have what probability one, right. And so this is called the chronicle delta.
So the chronicle delta just says that you can only get a one in the matrix is J and I are equal, which, so row, row one and column one, row two and column two, row three and column three, and that gives you the probabilities of going through the filter system.
And here we have an example, a workout example of this going going through this, through this type of filter. And, and this uses that, I think it's complicated for today, but this uses the turned around filter that we had here.
And, and to model the turnaround filter, you need to calculate the complement.
So you, so when you square, when you want to know the probability of going from plus s to plus t, you need to, you need, and to square this, you need to multiply the probability with its complement.
The complement was this, which we saw here.
And it's also expressed with the style. So you need the complement where when you have a matrix compliment you it's a style and so, so this shows you that you need this complement and now, basically what we can see is that if this is supposed to be true now you can calculate this,
multiply this out, right, you can say this is this plus this plus this so these are the three possibilities s to plus t s to zero t s to minus t, and they all have to add up to one.
And at the same time, this also has up this year the part that without the trend, without the inversion also has to add up to one this is.
And so, these two equations are only consistent for all relative orientations of the T and the s apparatus is, if we have these law, if, if the, if the inverse of if all these inverts are true.
And so that means that actually this amplitude is always equals to the exchange amplitude of inverted.
And so, so these are basically using the filters, the fundamental laws of quantum mechanics arrived so the first one is the chronic a delta that was with that basically only the ones in the matrix, only the probabilities.
So that only these amplitudes are one. Then the next one is that to get this probability you need to add up all the past through the filters. And the third one says that that the inverse of this bracket is, is the same as the way when you when you
change the two target and the two, the two.
Yeah, the two location thank you and build the inverse and it's the same and without exchanging. And so this and so you can derive those three laws of quantum mechanics from the filter from the filter experiments.
And, and, and I think this is quite elegant and relatively simple to understand, and you can read it, read it up in the third volume of Feynman, I think it's chapter five in the third volume of his physics.
You can get it online. So if you if you go to five lectures on physics, you Google that, you come to a page at Caltech, where he gave the lectures in the 60s and there all the lectures are beautifully for free you can look at them.
They are really well, very well set up and chapter five explains all of this.
And, but, but basically, so I know very quickly, it takes a bit longer to do it properly but really quick I showed you, these are the three fundamental laws and this means I will do this a bit later.
But, but, but one very important aspect is the following. So if this is a location of a particle.
These are basic and basic locations, for example, in the three dimensional space with three dimensions, you can express one of the locations, or the one of the amplitude as a linear as a linear combination of the basis states so to take a complex number.
So one, you multiply by the first component, the second one by the second component, third by the third component, you add them up, and that gives you this number. So, and this is what this also shows.
So, when you want to go from the lab, they have the amplitude of going from that location to that location, basically you express each of the two locations in the base in the base dimensions.
And that's in the coordinate system of two coordinates. That's just like saying this year is this vector is just a combination of x and y.
So, so this is just z is just equals alpha y plus x.
Right, and this is so this is basically what is done here. So you are basically expressing a certain particle location as a linear combina or some other property as a linear combination of the basic coordinates.
So we could this is the one times x. So therefore there is no, there is no parameter here, but this is alpha y.
And, and, and so these complex numbers are just the parameters to express the location or the quantum property expressed by this cat using.
And by the way, why is it called bra cat, because, because these are brackets, right, these two are brackets, and then they call this one a bra, this one a cat, and at this time sexism was still although you know they were not woke yet.
So they were allowed to call it a bra. And nowadays it's still called a bra. And it's interesting.
And I've, this is no joke. I told this to my sister, she works in the cultural area she runs a beauty Institute, and she told me asked her to ask a gender professor at the faculty of mathematics or physics, and she tries to get rid of the brown, because he believes it's sexist.
So that's how where we've gotten but when the bracket occasion was, it was invented, you know, the man invented, we then was, was the rack.
And, and she just said, you know, these are brackets, I call this product is that he was a Frenchman so they invented the bra, you know, what do you expect.
So, so, so that's how it came about.
So, so, so this is, so now we have, we have gone through the very basics of quantum mechanics, and using the filters and other any questions to this.
It's a bit of mathematics but not very complicated.
Yeah, so I think, I think the best for you to do is to, is to, is to read this chapter and find them. I don't, I don't have this the time.
Yes. So, so, yes, so he's very in the best sense very Jewish. He's great. And, and he is. So the, the, the, for each, if you go to this web page for each, for each printed lecture that's also the video that you can watch.
It's really well, it's very fun. And, and so anyhow, but, but what you can take from this is that this filtering allows you the passing of the, of the beams of particles with the filter allows you to derive the basic laws of quantum mechanics and that
what was, that's what was actually done in a way you know that they use these types of experiments to derive the basic laws of quantum mechanics only that it didn't happen in the order that is presented in the book by Feynman.
So Feynman to explain it easily he then invented a new order in which it was of course not done in practice, but you know that's normal. So if you look at wire stress.
So, when wire stress started to systematize mathematics, he also invented a new order how each mathematical truth is based on on the basic axioms of piano.
And, and of course this carded the way that mathematics that evolves, you replace it by an artificial evolution of mathematics, that is now the way mathematics is taught in every textbook, but when he did it.
He ordered everything to make it more plausible in the way it evolves and, and, and so this is how Feynman does it as well. But basically it's always about can the particle reach another, another position, and what do I have to do to calculate this and this way you get to these basic laws.
I think before we do a bit more of, we are, we will finish the quantum mechanics part today, I promise, so that we can maybe do a bit of quantum computers already today or the rest tomorrow.
So now we do, we do a, how many, how much break can in this parent.
Yes, how many minutes.
We'll see you at five past 11.
So you, you haven't got words for your.
Some, some of you would say.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
When we were talking about related things.
We're using quite a lot.
Just a bra or just a yes.
Yeah.
And today you have done that. Can you just remind me what just a bra would mean or just a bit.
Just a cat means.
Just a cat means the sum of the positions of the base state of the quantum system.
And you will see it much better here.
I'll jump to it.
This.
So this is, this is the quantum bit.
And, and you can see this is sorted to be a sphere.
We can sign up there is a quantum bit.
And now this sign is composed as a linear combination of the zero and the one state.
And so that are complex numbers which went square and together always give one.
Yeah.
And they determine where on the sphere you are.
So you see the zero and one is here the zeros of the other side.
And basically, and basically, depending on the linear combination of the two, you end up on the point of the sphere.
And it goes to the main point that.
infinitely infinitely many points that a quantum bit can take on. And that's what that's the point that that.
Like many, many people forget about what.
He seems to think that you can just have a bit is to put it is just like a bit.
Because when you measure it, you only get a zero or one.
But the problem is that physically that fun for each issue with infinitely many possibilities.
And when, and when we have several students together, you have to have a superposition pattern like the one I showed at the beginning of all these single cupids.
And so the way to super complex and I think the use of quantum computing is that you think the technical control control.
You know, but I think it's not possible to control the property.
It's also the complexity of the quantum waves to hide the quantum with the continuum.
And the bits, but the bits in the 64 bit computer, they are from a computer.
And they are always in the fine state.
And each of these is have been like another space.
And that's what the equation shows, especially the one on the bottom side.
You could suppose there's 10 divided by two times 10 zero plus.
He will see sign.
And can't hear me.
Can't even get one of the basic.
There's all of this.
They're location.
They're just the case.
But of course, how do you know where the base states are as it were.
You should be able to put the computer in the base.
So if you have a bottom rate to start at,
put it down to zero Kelvin and then you hope that they're all settled at zero.
And then you should blaze us against them or I need to put them into a higher.
Okay.
And we know we can't get down to absolute.
Yeah, that's all the bits are.
And that's what I wrote.
Yeah.
I was supported.
So when I write to me like this,
you always have to be professional and post.
Sometimes you have to follow me,
but always see what I really mean.
He was writing around.
Actually, it's a bit catalytic.
What was going to be.
So which are called, I know.
Good.
So let's continue.
Sorry.
So,
so I'm so this is
this shows you
kind of a precursor to the
to the Schrodinger equation,
which is an equation that describes
the the relationship between
the C, which I will explain a minute what it and and the Hamiltonian.
So what is this?
So C I of T is the likelihood to find
a particle
in step C in one of the base states.
So this is like what I said here.
So this could be a particle and
and see I
is the likelihood of finding it in one of the base states.
For example, the basic X, right?
The base states are modern as like co-ordinated in a coordinate
system and see I is the likelihood of finding
a particle in one of the base states.
And as you can see, this likelihood is
is is time dependent.
And so if you
had created computer derivative by T,
you would have the likelihood of summing up
over the different base states of the system
and adding them together.
So this sum is again reminds you of what you've seen here
that such amplitudes are always made up of sums
of the elements of the elements in the base states.
And this is this is a matrix that gives you the coefficients
with which you so these coefficients we saw here a coefficient, right?
The matrix gives you the coefficients for doing this in higher dimensions
than if you have only one dimension.
And so matrix H has to include the thing we are doing to the system
to cause it to change.
If you know the numbers that are in the matrix,
we have a complete description of the behavior of the system in time.
And Hamilton was the first who invented this matrix
as a way to calculate the position of particles
using classical mechanics.
So here there was a guy before me who was told I launched
and formalized Newton's law in the in a very elegant frame
using differential calculus.
And then Hamilton formalized it even more elegantly
with this matrix notation, matrix notation,
proper English.
And here you can see how the elements of the matrix are added
together, multiplied with this amplitude.
And that's a dagger to P because when he lived there was no photo yet.
So the precursor of the modern photography.
And I don't know why he's distorted.
He's not, he looks a bit better if he's not horizontally distorted.
So it has to do with the arrangement of the screen.
So the Hamiltonian is equal to its transpose complement.
So this star means transpose complement.
That's when you turn around the matrix
and exchange every element of the matrix with the complement,
which was in Z.
So that means when you, so you remember Z,
Z is equal to X plus E times Y and Z complement is X minus E times Y.
So then you have to take the matrix and replace all its elements,
turn it around like this and then replace all its elements
by the by their composites that that doesn't change the matrix.
So it's a, it's a unitary matrix and the total probability
is equal to its transpose complement.
And the total probability of finding a particle is,
is then the sum of each of the amplitudes.
And that's of course, that is independent of time.
And so now to make this a bit clear,
if we have only one single particle like an atom address.
So if you would freeze helium atom to zero Kelvin,
you would have to use a single atom address and it is in only one state.
So, and then you have to keep it frozen like this then the,
the physical circumstances are not changing with time.
And so age is an independent of time.
This now gives for one single value.
It gives you so, so the matrix,
bigger matrix of age, you know, contains, for example,
one times two matrices could put it H11, H12,
H21, H22.
But now we have a matrix with only one element,
which is, which is H1.
And so we say, for this single probability
or amplitude of CB in the one state the system may have.
If we calculate the derivative of this by time,
this is equal to the product of the first element of the matrix
multiplied by the value of C.
And so, and if, if not an H11 is constant,
then the solution is even simpler.
If you, if you now calculate the solution,
so this is differential equation because here you have a variable
and here is the differential of a variable one equation.
So that's called a differential equation.
The solution of this is another equation and this is C1 is E,
the exponent of E divided by H times 11, H11 times T.
And so, so this is, and E is also called,
the matrix H is also called the energy matrix
because E one model is the energy here, right?
So this is, you saw this earlier with momentum P
and that's another form of momentum together
with mass gives you the energy
and this is also form of expressing the energy.
So this is the quantum mechanical expression
of a system with one state.
And now here we have, we have, if we have a two state system,
so this is the ammonia molecule
and the ammonia molecule, maybe I should read this out first.
This is so funny.
Now this molecule like any other has an infinite,
infinite number of states.
It can spin around any possible axis.
It can be moving in any direction,
can be vibrating inside and so on and so on.
It is therefore not the two state system at all,
but we want to make an approximation
that all other states remain fixed
because they don't enter into what we are concerned with
at the moment.
This is very strong in physics all the time.
Problems get simplified to one aspect of the system
that is interesting and all the rest is abstracted away.
We will consider only that the molecule is spinning
around its axis of symmetry as shown in the figure
that it has zero translational momentum
that is vibrating as little as possible.
And so you see, you have this axis here,
the molecule is spinning around it
and now it has two states,
either with the nitrogen atom up
or it can spin around like this
and then the nitrogen is down.
That's the second state.
So this is state one and this is state two.
And so if we express this with the Hamiltonian,
we see we have basically two equations.
We have this equation describing the likelihood
of being in state one.
And this is the likelihood of being in state two.
And you see that now you have a more complicated Hamiltonian
with four entries.
I messed up the notation here, should be like this, of course.
And so now you see that the likelihood
of each of the two states is composed
as a linear combination of the two states
with these parameters which are usually complex numbers.
What is important to me?
It seems to me it's just about clockwise
and anti-clockwise spinning.
No.
It's upward.
It's up or down.
In both cases, anti-clockwise spinning.
You see the arrow points into this arrow here.
It's the same as both times anti-clockwise spinning.
But here the nitrogen is pointing up
and here the nitrogen is pointing down.
So it's about the orientation of the nitrogen
with regard to the spinning axis.
Yeah.
Does this have anything to do with spin?
No.
This is interesting.
So this example shows you that you can regard
any property as quantum mechanical property
and call it a state.
So here we have two base states of the molecule.
We have the base state nitrogen pointing up
and the other base state nitrogen pointing down.
They are now in this physics as theater reduction
one to two states.
Another situation, it's the spin up or down.
Another situation is the polarization of a photon.
In another situation, it may be the level of the electron
on the blank model of the atom and so on.
So you can always select other properties of the system
to look at, call them quantum states, and then calculate them.
This may be a good time to mention about paper.
Barry and I wrote a paper.
I can put it up on screen.
You mean the quantum one.
So which you might find interesting to read.
Just appeared on a heave.
So I should be able to find this way.
Yes, this is it.
They all know what our heave is, I guess.
Yes.
So they don't review paper.
It's a six or they publish it out of paper.
And I know the director of our heave personally
and I can see it's involved in the possible random change.
And he told me that the six weeks would not spend
on evaluating the quality of the paper.
It was spent on deciding on the which category it should go.
I don't know the end.
No, history and philosophy of physics.
And so this is the, this is the on your paper.
And it's, it gives you an ontology of physics and it uses
and it also does this for quantum mechanics
so basically our idea was to give an ontology
to show an ontology of classical physics
so classical mechanics and then quantum mechanics
to show that our ontological approach can cover both time
both types of physics.
So anyhow, so, so this now here these two states are selected
as a base state.
Therefore the matrix describe combinations of the two base states.
And when you multiply elements of the matrix with the two states
then together you obtain probabilities of being in that state.
And, and so this is this is basically why only probabilities
because as you know quantum mechanics is only probabilistic.
So which is off now.
And, and so this is this is what this is what it's about.
Now, here it's, it's again, it's, it's described in bracket notation.
So, so this is C, the state you're interested in.
This is so to speak, the empty sheet of C being in state one,
plus the amplitude of C being in state two,
multiplied with the parameter of that state.
So this is a linear combination that expresses this state
in terms of the two of the two base states one and two.
So this is basic one is basically.
And this is super important right so this basically gives you an idea
how in quantum mechanics the state of a system is always expressed
as a linear combination of the basic states and if you have a full
flat quantum system which we can't calculate with, you don't have a sum
but you have an integral over infinitely many states so the full quantum
description would be a Hilbert space of infinite dimension and this is
just a two dimensional Hilbert space.
And so, so this is just what I wanted to demonstrate with this atom,
which is a molecule of ammonium.
Now.
So I want to summarize the laws of quantum mechanics one more time.
So, C and C are states of the electron or state of the system.
One, two, three, four are the base states.
So the base states are orthogonal so which means that we have a matrix
which is only filled with ones on the diagonal and there's no likelihood
at all to grow from one state, from one base state to the other,
but only from one base state to one base state to the same base state.
C can be described as a linear combination of the amplitude of all the base states.
These are all the base states.
And now I say C might be amplitude C to be instead one times this complex
number, two, three, four are the atoms together.
And then I can like we did it here.
Yeah, this is like here.
And so this way we get this linear combination.
And if we consider any two states C and C, the amplitude of the state C
will also be, to be also be in the state C can be found by projecting the state C
into the base states and then projecting from each base state into the state C.
So this is C to one, one to three, C to two, two to three, C to three and so on.
Some all together this gives you the total probability.
And this is again what we showed at the very beginning with this analogy of the
matrix lit whole.
I said this equation is so important.
Where is this bloody hell?
Here.
This is so important because this already gives you the idea why you have to sum up
all these different amplitudes.
Okay, now we, we are almost, this is the first law.
And then there's another very important aspect.
So, if X n is a local state of the party, then we can define the amplitude of being
the state as this, since the base states are associated with the location on the line,
we can think of the amplitude C n as a function of the coordinate X and the write it as C X
n.
And C X n will in general vary with time and are therefore also front of the so we obtain
this.
Right.
And this is now basically the river.
Simon tries to derive the, the screening equation in a soft way, but we are not going
to go through this.
So what have we learned so far.
This is the kind of very important summary of the difference between classical physics
and quantum mechanics.
So in classical physics, you have a phase space with individual points.
To make this bigger.
Oh, this is actually better, isn't it.
Yes, now you can sense.
I would like to show you how Hamilton, he looks so much like a frog but he looks better but
he looks better.
So, so classical mechanics makes use of a phase space whose individual points represent possible
states of a physical system.
And, and with some with subsets of points representing physical properties.
So for example, you all know that that in a classical system, you don't have any, any
irrational, sorry, complex numbers, but you have, but you have
only, for example, classical ordinance system and then you have a point, some like another
point that you have locations defined of the point and also can define if it's a moving
body, you can only find location and given time, but you can also let's say define its
momentum.
And then with time and momentum, you have a phase space defining where the point is and
how fast it is moving.
Right.
And, and so this is the facelift of classical mechanics.
Quantum mechanics use the complex silvered space and physical properties correspond to
subspaces.
And so a one dimensional subspace is what we call the state.
Right.
And so such a one dimensional suspect is a line.
And it's called a ray in quantum mechanics at one ray is what is so what is a senior
senior point in classical physics is not a ray in quantum physics.
And the ray expresses that that you can take.
We had it here was a was a very simple Hamiltonian where this is only H1 here.
And this equation, we multiply this with one complex number.
But if we, but, but we can have infinitely many complex number with which we can come
by the sea.
And by doing this, we get a line.
Right.
So if you multiply by one, we get a value.
If you might go to another value and another and another.
And so because they're infinitely many complex numbers, we can imagine that, that we can
basically parameterize the, the particle to be everywhere on the ray.
So the ray is what is the point.
So, so that means that in quantum mechanics, there is no single point where anything is,
but there's always a ray.
And.
Yes.
Doesn't that contradict the quantum idea?
No, because, because when you measure the particle, you get a likelihood of it.
And the quantization that you're always going to occurs by the plan constant.
So we've seen the plan constant.
Because, because.
Where is it?
Where's an equation that contains the plan constant here?
Right.
So we have here the plan constant in this exponent, but we can still get an infinite,
infinite number of, of, of points.
They're just based in a certain way because the plan constant.
Right.
So the quantization comes in by the plan constant, which expresses that only at certain regular
intervals, we get so that we can measure quantum phenomenon.
But, but, but basically it's still aligned because there are infinitely many values of
age.
So, so that's.
So there is a line, but we can only measure certain discrete points along the line.
Yes.
Exactly.
And, and this is why, why the atom, and this is when we build a standard data apparatus
that splits the beam, we basically have such a measuring machine that measures two discrete
points.
But, but, but we must imagine that, that, that the particle itself can of course be anywhere,
but, but with our experimental setting, we can only measure certain points and, and, and
this is a quantization.
And now, now.
So now the, the, the logical negation is testing mechanics, the logical negation of the property
P, the corresponds to set of points B in space phase page, which is to say the property
not P is represented by the set theoretic complement PC of the set P. So here you see this.
But in quantum, no, it's actually.
So, so this is the point, for example, a certain point, and the complement all the other points
in the face space where the particle is not important mechanics is different quantum case.
The negation is an orthogonal complement of the subspace.
So here we have, here we have, for example, a ray, which is spin in Z direction, and its
negation is the orthogonal spin in Z minus direction.
So in quantum mechanics, a negation is an orthogonal ray orthogonal to the ray I was to the first
ray.
And so, so you, now you have to think of, of the collection of all vectors in the space that are
orthogonal to the, to every vector in the subspace as a complement.
And if P is a projector onto P, it's negation is present by the vector projector one mind one minus P.
So this is kind of how this works.
And this is a picture trying to depict that the quantum space, the basic dimensions, the states are raised.
And now, so there's a very different profound difference between classical and quantum properties, which is
illustrated by considering a two dimensional here but space representing possible properties of a spin off particle.
So spin off particle is schematically shown on the right.
The line P through the origin is a physical property of spin of the positive spin one half in units of the plank constant.
Again, this is where the quantization comes in.
The line P perpendicular to this line is orthogonal complement and represents physical property of spin minus one half in the Z direction.
One point is that there are many other lines through the origin such as Q, which is now the spin in directly X.
And they are neither the same as the property as Z, which is a spin in the Z direction, nor it's negation Z that minus one form.
And you can see here that also there is of course a complement to X, which would be X minus which would be now here, right. And so you have infinitely many angles in which you can measure the spin.
And each gives you a spin and a counter spin.
You know you have infinitely many. And so you have infinitely many possibilities of determining the location of the point.
And so this is, this is very important. And what we say in quantum mechanics is we have two properties.
For example, P and Q, they are in copper they are in there are in copper incompatible when the projectors onto the corresponding subspace do not commute so when P times two is not two times P.
And when we don't have commuting operators, then you have a situation that legs is precise analog and classical physics, for example, entanglement, and we will understand entanglement in a bit, but quantum entanglement entanglement doesn't allow such a subspace commutation.
And so if there's no such commutation, then we have, then we can't, we can't have an analog in classical physics.
And so this evolution from the Stern-Gannach apparatus to Schrdinger finding his famous equation took only five years.
And it was a great historical moment, marking the birth of the quantum mechanical description of matter. It occurred when Schrdinger first wrote down his equation for many years, internal atomic structure of matter had been a great mystery.
No one had been able to understand what had mattered together, why there was a chemical binding and especially how it could be that atoms could be stable.
So this discovery of the proper equations of motion of electrons on an atomic scale, provided a theory from which atomic phenomena could be calculated positively, accurately and in detail in principle.
And so that was why it was such a big revolution because suddenly could calculate exactly why hydrogen atom is stable and which different variants of hydrogen atom exist.
So you thought helium and tritium could also be calculated, and also the helium atom. And so the equation is capable of explaining all atomic phenomena except those involving magnetism and relativity.
And the energy level of an atom and all the effects of chemical binding. So, this is so, so affected and, you know, effective that now there are quantum simulators that can simulate the binding of a ligand to a protein.
And if you know the chemical structure of a protein, so it's amino acids how they are constituted in space. And you notice exactly, and you know where you know which electrons residues are, you can use Schrdinger equation systems to calculate to try to predict the position of a ligand towards these
You have to then again abstract a little bit, but, but this is really fascinating that you can now do calculations about matters so precisely.
But it's only true in principle because soon the mathematics becomes too complicated to solve exactly any but the simplest problems only the hydrogen helium atoms have been calculated to high accuracy.
So there's approximations some fairly sloppy time this says some fairly sloppy is so lovely.
What many of the facts of more complicated atoms and of chemical binding of molecules can also so in quantum chemistry.
You have to simplify a bit but you can still use the quantum principle to calculate relationships of matter and it's very fascinating. And that was possible to to to the Schrodinger equation.
It's very fascinating because it takes a day to to teach it how to get them.
Now, we know we have already had a superposition a superposition is that the quantum particle is not in one of the base states by I, but that it is a combination like I showed here for two, for just to stay combination of the values.
It has in the two states. So, so if it's projected on the state and this is a quantum superposition, and basically all quantum in a quantum computer, all quantum bits are into the position state.
So there is there are I mean, when you measure a quantum bit as we will see in a while, you obtain a pure state, an approximation of a pure state, but it's not really a pure state.
So that means that that that if you let's say you have to base state like in a qubit. And now you measure it.
You get almost zero almost one, but you will have still a very tiny complex number in front of the other parameter. So you have something like 0.999999 times one state or 0.001 times the other.
So you don't get a, so you have always superposition in quantum.
And that's why they are always a that's why it's a rail line, right, because you have infinitely many points. However,
there's something else and superposition, which is entanglement. And so, let me explain to you what entanglement is so entangled particles can be prepared experimentally for example you can take a photon and polarize it
generate a pair of low energy spin one half photons. Oh yes, I want to give you an example of a spin one particle photon has been one.
Yeah, so photon has been one, and you can get out of it you can get two weak energy photons of spin one whole.
And here. And so, so the two spin one half particles here you have particle a and b, then the superposition of states.
So if the x direction spin up is measured for particle C one, then spin down is always measured for particle C two, even if they're far apart.
And this is also true for.
I think wrong rotation but it doesn't matter now so I this should be C one C two but, but basically you see that the first particle has x has is is a mixture.
No, these are the two particles no that was correct. So these are I just to think about a bit so. So, this is the first particle this is the second particle the first particle has x spin up and the second x spin down.
And so this is, this is the, this is that that this particle has the opposite states, then this particle right and this means the combination of the two spaces called the 10th one.
And, and so, if you measure now this particle in x direction, it will have x direction up.
You always have the opposite direction. But if you don't measure one of the particle, you don't know one which one has been up and which one has been down.
And now the interesting thing is, if you produce a two particles and take them away from each other very far, and do the measurement on one then you always have the opposite measurement of the other.
And that has that that is called non locality of quantum mechanics, though, you know, the point is that when you create the party basically encode already this opposite information.
Now if you take them apart and measure one particle, then the other one always has the opposite, and they can't communicate because they're so far apart that even if they could only communicate by some unknown means above the speed of light now we know that the speed
that can be attained in the universe. So basically, you take them so far apart that they cannot communicate and then you do this measurement and you find out that the spin is opposite.
And this is called entanglement and the question is, how can this be how can it be that we don't know which part of this which that but we know it upon measurement we don't understand this, but we can describe it with this equation.
And so, and so these these states are incompatible right so so what does this mean so
that is messed up.
The quantum part of the face space is here by space age a complex vector space with an inner product an element of age.
Here to be here is denoted as psi the inner product is written like this.
So that it doesn't mess itself up again.
It's not groupable it's such a city software.
You see that's the consequence of Microsoft having the monopoly on this so they don't have to make an effort to make it really good.
And so the inner product that's it's like and so the counterpart of a point in classical phase space is a one dimensional subspace of Hilbert space array consisting of all multiple C times C of some some non zero C to see an arbitrary complex
and I've explained this. So this is why it's aligned because we can have infinitely many C's arrays returned by the attic operator so you can, you can basically say this year this pet bra determines array in linear algebra notation.
And so, if you take this, if you take the operator and apply to a cat, then you get this.
And, and this, this basically allows you to measure to measure quantum quantum magnitudes.
So, this is a certain interpretation of quantum mechanics invented by on this and Griffiths. We don't have to go into this now but basically, I just want to explain a bit to you so, so that you know what a projector is so if you have two projectors P and q that
describe some properties like for example spin in x and spin in y direction.
And if the two projectors commute so their products are for is a change with the order of it is changeable, then they commute and only when this conditions fulfilled the product itself is a projector, and it projects into a subspace P and q in a grid with quantum
but if it's not like this. So, then the conjunction P and q is meaningless in the sense that the history interpretation assigns it no meaning in other words, one cannot assign two incompatible properties to one quantum system at the same time so therefore
you can't interpret the singlet entanglement because let's see the singlet entanglement this year. This is the thing that entanglement where you have two photons which I entangled one in the one point one action the other in the other direction and now you
this is again way of expressing this expression of this of this of this and now let's look at states A and B. So, a projector a tensor B is a tensor this is the matrix filled with once times this.
This is the matrix which represents a property of the other product product space a tensor B is the conjunction of the separate properties of the subsets and A and B. So, so basically, you have, you have to raise which describe a property of the system like the spin direction.
A tensor B, then you basically have the conjunction of these properties so that means a particle having both being being projected to with this projector has both properties for example, spin a and positive and spin B.
Negative is, is, is the commuting operator, which, which assigns a projector to the particles A and B. And basically it says particle A is the spin direction positive and particle B is x spin direction negative so you could say if you have a standard range like this.
That is the z direction the particles lies like this. If you turn it by maybe 45 degrees, you get x direction of the particle to be separated like this, you know, and so this and so if you do this on two different particles if you're two different
particles, one has gone through one standard gap apparatus the other ones with the other. Now both can be assigned assigned the spins to these particles and that's perfectly perfect but in the entanglement.
In this projector, there is no projector that commutes. And therefore, we cannot. So if we project something into this singlet entanglement, there is no commute there is no, there is no such tender product and if there's no tender product, we cannot say anything about the spin of a or B.
In, in the direction unless you measure the z direction but we can't say anything about any other direction because of the entanglement. And, and so, and so this, this just is to show you that mathematically.
So, those, those paradoxical one would say it corresponds to state for which we have non commuting projectors and, and this.
Why am I showing this to you because we get to project us with the quantum computers, and, and we will also be with entanglement there.
So, what time is it now.
If we still want to talk and we want to talk with right.
So, yes.
Well, I do, I will do what I think I will do is at least the quantum bits.
So, so now we have.
Yes.
Or does anyone understand entanglement.
To be fair, there is a lot of people that I'm not planning to take way too long probably to.
So, let me see if I can describe the scenario we have a photon which we split into two photons, one of which has a spin and the other which has a complimentary spin.
And we send the second spot on thousands of miles away.
Yes. Yes.
And then we change the spin of the first proton.
And even though there's no way in which they can be communicating with each other.
No, we don't change it. We measure it.
We measure it.
So, so maybe to make it one more.
I think I miss I expected when I first saw this equation so what we see here are this equation described to spin in x direction this equation described to spin in the directions.
These are two different singlet entanglements one with regard to x, one with regard to the spin. Okay, so they are both are describing different Stern gala apparatus if you would like so.
And this year, this, this is one state of particles and B in which a has been up and B has been down. This is the other state of particles and B where a has been down and B has been up so a and B others are part of this.
I think I got this wrong last time. So this is, and so we and so the what this expresses is that there is basically a mixed state between this tensor and this tensor.
This tensor describing a being spin up this tensor side describe B being spin down, and this tensor describing x being spin down and x being spin up.
Now, when we make the measurement, we discover that x is a spin up, then we know that these always been down, though now they are, they are separate geographically.
And if we discover that it's been down and be a spin up, then we then we will always be up so this and the same in the direction. However, the two projectors, these projectors don't really commute.
Although there's a tensor product shown you the projectors corresponding to these don't commute as is shown here. Right.
So, so this tensor product of a and B commutes doesn't commute.
Projects.
So this is a project on to a B with C but only commutes with the project is zero and one on a and B, but it doesn't commute with with the tensor product.
And so though there is a tensor indicated here there is no mathematical commutation, because you cannot change the order of the two projectors mathematically.
And so therefore, that's what on this and and
I would just say, therefore, this is not an interpretive mistake. Right. So you can't because non projecting not really project which are measurements of the front of state.
Projectors mean that there is no way to assign days that the that the that the tensor product doesn't need to assign to reliable properties to the particles in question.
The particles in question.
The, the, the, the tensor product of the project doesn't assign interpretable property to the particles in question.
And so that's you can see here because you don't know unless you do a measurement you don't know which of the particles it's been up and you only know that they are anti-sensical.
And this is the paradox that you can have a quote on, quote on being changed in some way in one part of the universe, it writes to an equal often an opposite change in another quote on this paradox is eliminated by Griffith.
It's just, it's just, it just says that basically, the, the entanglement has no, it's uninterpreted, uninterpretable, and my interpretation in this case is that we created the entanglement with the machine that created the entangled photons.
But we, because we don't understand what's really going on, we can just say there is an entanglement but we don't know in which direction which photon is and this gets only revealed.
When, when we measure the photos.
The properties, let's say, take the spin and the X.
Is this property dependent or independent of the spin and the Z.
Yeah, so that's very good question. So they are not only independent, they are, they are totally for the same particle, they are mutually exclusive.
And that's because of the, that's another instance of the Heisenberg principle, that's why I introduced other principle. So if I measure the spin in the X direction.
I can't measure anymore the spin is the direction because I have the, what's called the collapse of the wave function.
And that means that, that I don't have a wave anymore after the measurement that is like the way before that I now have information about this particle in with regard to a certain dimension but I can't obtain it anymore for
for, for another dimension. And it's basically like the particle, I sense a particle source, and now it hits it split and it hits the screen I see it on the screen but now it has lost its properties, because now it's not anymore flying in the beam but it's
it has now condensed on the glass plate right so now I have information about it which spin its head, but I've lost the quantum system the way it's not anymore way.
It has now become a physical piece of dust that I see on the glass plate. And so in this way I've destroyed the wave character of the particle by measuring it.
And this is what happens here as well and you can only measure in one in one, the spin one dimension that's why on the quantum computer, you only measure always in one dimension.
You can't afterwards the particle is sort of be gone.
But then he said, given that there is an infinite amount of angles on which we can measure spin that the particle has an infinite amount of independent exclusive properties.
Yes, yes.
This is very clever statement. And this we will see at tomorrow at the end of the lecture when we get to maybe we are faster.
And that's by the way this infiniteness is expressed by the by the by the index w. So you know that you have x, y and z. These are three axis, but if I spin my hand like this they can be anywhere on the sphere right and w expresses this that they are arbitrary right and now and now.
So one qubit has, has an infinite amount in infinite amount of is a continuous variable, it can have an infinite amount of combinations.
And, and so that's the fundamental difference between the quantum computer and the classical computers, the classical computer there's electricity on the channel or not on the gate or not.
And if there's no electricity zero, if there is electricity it's one. And, and sometimes you can also have have errors in in single bit measurements but but this taking a side.
Basically, in a, in a quantum computer each qubit has an infinite amount of a fair of possible instances, but when you measure, you can only measure one.
And the problem is how do you before you the measurement. How do you manipulate this infinite amount before you do your measurement and keep it so that you get the regularities that you want in a gated circuit.
Right, because in a classically gated circuit everything is regular, according to the laws of bullet logic, but how do you want to maintain this regularity in a quantum computer and that that's what we are going to think about.
So, on the griffids have a relatively sober human entanglement, but there are some people who think that we can use quantum entanglement in order to do quantum communication over long distances, in a way which will be preventing people listening to the outside.
Yes, yes.
Do those people have a point.
Yes, so so we can, we can already, we can already do it now for short distances, because we can use the entanglement and I could I don't, I have to, but I didn't prepare this.
It's called quantum teleportation so that the entanglement. So when basically there's a circuit that that or an experiment to set up where you can basically prepare a particle.
And then you can send this particle to another party.
You can then measure yourself the particle and give this other part of the measurement result and then this measurement result is meaningless to anyone who doesn't have the particle but if you combine this measurement result with the particle you can then decipher the code.
So this quantum entanglement can indeed be used for secure communication because you don't even have to encrypt the the transmitted measurement result anymore because somebody who doesn't have the particle will not be able to do anything with it because there are infinitely many possibilities.
And you have picked one and now this is this property is used for the other to decipher the particle.
So with this you could, you can create quantum communication. The big problem with this is that we don't have quantum repeaters.
And so, because quantum particles lose their properties when they get transported over after a certain time, you would have to have a quantum repeater that basically measures the property of the particle, and then recreate the particle in exactly the same way and transport it to the next
quantum repeater so that you always freshen the particle, the informant and we don't know how to build such quantum repeaters.
So, so therefore right now the dream of, of secure communication by quantum teleportation as it's called, which is not a teleportation because you need to transmit in a conventional way to your measurement results, but because of this because we don't have.
So this has been done, but only over short distances, because, because a particle, the many particles can lose their quantum state in a millisecond.
So, so you need, well, at the speed of light, you can travel quite far in a millisecond. So that's the 300 kilo, 300 kilometers, right. And so therefore, yes, it's 300 kilometers in a millisecond, and therefore, I think the longest experiment is 200 kilometers that has been performed.
So within 200 kilometers of this travel distance, the particle did not lose yet its quantum property that you wanted to use for this for this to quantum teleportate. But so you would have to have so if you think of the United States.
Now maybe we can build a quantum system that that the best systems I think lose the quantum entanglement property in a millisecond so maybe you can build with half a millisecond.
And if you send 600 instead of 300 kilometers now then you would have to have a repeater every 500 kilometers. So that would be 12 repeaters across the United States.
Just to communicate within the United States in Germany it's a bit easier.
Because you just need to repeat it, but you need at least one in Luxembourg it works really well.
But they are not the world powers, you know, who look for quantum quantum communication. So now in Luxembourg you could already one dean's stellar could already inform the other one about a secret today was for the teleportation.
Russia would have from bloody North talk to Moscow it's I think it's 10,000 kilometers so you need 20 quantum repeat.
So, so this is why it doesn't work so you had another question.
So but but this is this is basically this entanglement.
I have much more I have a full set of slides explaining the whole series of graces but this is not the right moment to show it.
So this book, if you're interested in this. It's called consistent quantum theory appeared in 2002 in Cambridge it's summarized is there are three authors who have on this.
This is the third one we've written book about consistent quantum theory. All of them have the same trick that they basically trick with the commute commuting operators.
But but I think Griffith book is the one that presented in the best really the best way so, but you need quite a lot of mathematical knowledge but it's a great book.
Anyhow, so let's. So what is a qubit so quantum computers they don't use bits but two bits, and here you have a qubit symbolized in a very primitive way as a two basic states of some physical system.
And so, so quantum computers can speed up some computational problems but
what's that.
But in practice this has has not shown has not really been shown so in practice, it has been shown the qubit has been built.
And also logical qubit have been built which are, which are several physical qubits that make up one, one real qubit, one logical qubit to do error correction this is but but no, nobody has yet calculated anything useful the quantum computer.
And for example, the three transformation which is what the quantum computers would be much better at than classic computers, because we don't have quantum computers of the sufficient size.
Now, what are two with their systems with two base states and many superposition states and an example of such a system is the spin vector of an electron or two energy levels of an atom.
And so, now the base states are always more like this the vector for for zero is is a vector of one and zero and the vector for one is just the opposite.
Right so this is how you model in a two dimensional space, you do your base vectors.
Now, this, this doesn't come across right on this on the slide, because of the projector maybe I could change it but I'm afraid that then I will kind of lose.
Then I will lose the completely lose because that looks like an over but it's really a sphere, perfect sphere, and on this perfect sphere now you have here you have to stay zero at the state one.
Sorry, step one and say zero, and there was a science here.
No, but suddenly the Google is out of sync.
I can stop it and restart it.
Okay, maybe I'm offline.
No, because I can see your face.
Let me stop stop presentation and represent presentation.
So, okay, so here you see, you see the sphere, and that's tie is one state of the qubit.
And this is expressed can be expressed as alpha times zero plus better times one that's a linear combination that expresses arbitrary qubit state and as you pointed out, they are infinitely many, infinitely many of them, because a and B are complex numbers and the only restriction is that they need to be there.
There's something to be one wise that's the case because it's a sphere.
So this is just Pythagoras.
And so that, but basically, because we have Pythagoras here, we can also express a and B in terms of the sign and the core sign, which works like this. This is the Euler theorem you don't, you can look it up but it's Euler's equation applied to this and now you don't have alpha and beta as complex number as anymore.
But you now have Euler coordinates defined by the angle. So this angle which, which is used to to operate on the zero state vector is tether.
And the one for the, the other is five. And so you see here, you now combine tether and five to define the position of side.
And we are to the two basic dimensions. And because this factor is not observable in qubits, we can drop it or set it to one and then we obtain this.
So and they are because they are infinite number of qubit states so therefore quantum computers manipulate continuous magnitudes.
They basically manipulate quantum mechanical waves in infinite habit space, while classical computers manipulate discrete bits.
And this is the fundamental reason why quantum computers have the potential to be much faster than than classic computers. However, it's much harder to manipulate the continuous magnitude than a classical discrete bit, which can only take
0 and 1. This is super important to understand. Are there questions to this?
What is it that is being manipulated? Is it the angle that is being manipulated so that you get, because that would just correspond to the bridge.
So what is being made. So when you create a quantum, when you have a quantum computer with one bit of only one bit, and initialize it to try to set the state to zero.
And if you have eight bits as well, you said all the charges. Sorry, it was too loud. You tried to set all the states to zero.
Now, when you have, when you now initialize this, you have, you can imagine that you have a superposition of all the qubits of the quantum computer into one big wave.
So you, so we do not have a wave equation for, for each thing, but you now have a superposition across the two excellent eight bits.
Okay. And also that's in this kind of eight bits 256 continuous variables, contributing all to the way, but you don't know the shape of the way.
You just know that you have a quantum mechanical superposition in the, in this eight bit register and now you will start manipulating it by applying energy for example, to single bits.
By doing this, you are changing the shape of the entire curve of the entire quantum mechanical wave until at the end of the manipulations you make a measurement.
That's, that's how you manipulate. So you're basically manipulating the whole register with the quantum game.
So let's, let's, and so this is what I mean was manipulated. So, but before I can explain that I first have to explain a quantum measurement.
So, so quantum measurements are described by a collection of measurement operators. These are operators, which act on the state space of the system that is measured.
You measure this, this year, you actually assign it either a one or a zero, you can't measure these angles.
And that's not again the discretization of quantum mechanics that we are asking for although Barry, you have an infinite number of positions on the two lines of the two rays zero and one.
And when you measure it, you can only get one value zero or one. So now we have again the quantization phenomenon, right. And, and, and so the index M here refers to the measurement outcome that is my current experiment.
So the quantum experiment is just zero and one in quantum computing.
The quantum systems play immediately both the measurement and the probability that result and occurs is the following. So you, you have sign bra cat side and then you have this operator in the middle that you have to multiply and you have to.
This means complicated integration operation but at the end you get a certain probability.
So you've done this measurement you get this measurement operator times C divided by the by this, which is, which is just a normalizing factor to express that you have now, basically, that this is normalized between zero and one.
So the, the measurement operator satisfies the completeness equation. So that means if you if you have two of them and you multiply these two operators, this is the inverted transposed.
So this is a complement matrix, then you get the identity matrix. And so the most important measurement we have is the measurement of a qubit in the computation basis. So, this is the measurement of a single qubit with two outcomes and zero and M one.
And now, now you basically get basically get zero or one if you apply this measurement to the system team.
Right. And, and, and usually this factor here is not taken into account, but you only want to know the zero and one. So, so this is this is what you what you measure.
And of course, so this is the state that we had before and now you want to see whether it's one or zero and then you do this kind of measurement.
And now comes back to a question. So quantum computer performs calculations by manipulating qubits within a quantum register. So quantum register is a set of several qubits that are changed together in one quantum register.
So quantum computer performs calculations by manipulating qubits within a quantum register. The state of a quantum register is the two exponent n dimensional here but space a tensor product of the state space of the single qubit.
So, so here you have the single qubits. And they are, and the tensor product of the vectors gives the quantum space here you see what a tensor product is.
So if you have this vector and this vector the tensor product gives a matrix of size n times n. So it's this times this and this and this and this and this and this and this and this and this and this and this and so on until you fill the whole matrix.
That's a tensor product, which gives you your new state space. And you, you have to be aware that each of those is already infinite.
Because this each qubit has a, has a, it's a complex vector space as is indicated by the sea, and has, and has, has infinitely many values. And out of this you make this, this, this big Hilbert space that gets more and more complicated as you're adding more qubits.
You have just 1000 qubits you have now the 10 x 1000 dimensional Hilbert space.
But which has infinite, but each of the dimension of the silvered space is, is continuous and not discrete, whereas in a quantum in a classical computer they are all discrete.
And this is the space on which the computation happens. And so, so let's look at a very simple base of this vector space. That is of course the base one and zero, and the register of two qubits and this basis, 00, 01, 1011.
The state of the register is now a superposition of the base set of this form. So what you have now is, so you have now two base, sorry, two bits.
And so this is bit one and bit two. But now you can multiply the first bit. So 01 and zero. So this is 01, this is 00, this is 02, 00 and 01. And now you can multiply them.
You have to multiply them with, with, with a complex, complex number for each of the basic states. So this is the basic state is complex, is multiplied with one complex number. The next base state with another complex number and the next and the next, so that you now have the sum of the four base states, each
one with one different complex number. And that gives this, this is very important equation, because it shows you that the classical computer would only have the four base states.
But here, you have to multiply each of the four with a complex number indicating where they are on the right. And so the superposition that you obtain by the four qubit is really this.
So this is, by the way, uppercase C to indicate that we are not talking about one qubit, but about a register. And now, as you see, we have now infinitely, even in the four qubit, you have four times infinitely many values that together form this complicated way.
And now this is the wave equation, so to speak, of your, of your, of your base states and why is it a wave equation because, because this cat here that you see here is equivalent to the, to the Schrodinger equation.
So the Schrodinger equation is like a superposition of four different Schrodinger equations, each made up of two qubit states, and each with its own complex number parameter multiplying.
And I think that when mathematicians work with quantum computer theory, they often forget how brittle this is.
It's more like the email we saw yesterday. It basically shows that the mathematician we're talking to. In this case, he was even visited but he forgot it.
He forgot to see that these are not just the four states. When you measure them, it's only the four states. But when you are calculating with some at runtime before you make the measurement you have an infinite amount of complexity you have to use even in the fall, even if you have just two qubits.
And this gets worse and worse, the more qubits you're adding because the number of qubit is in the exponent. So it's an exponential growth in complexity. And with with 1000 qubits. So the 1000 qubits by the way is the minimal amount of qubits that you need to have a practically useful quantum computer.
And you think of an RSA. So the RSA, you know, HGTPS, you know this, right? For the internet for encryption, when you pay with your credit card, the number of the credit card is encrypted.
And how does this work? The browser obtained a public key from an authority that provides public keys for the security and everybody has a public key.
Now the browser.
Let me signal the browser actually.
Yes, and then there's a private key known only by the authority that is now also known to the credit card company.
And now when you send your encrypted, now when you encrypt your transmission, you need both the private and the public key to be encrypted.
With quantum computing, you could decrypted quickly was a quantum computer was no without knowing the private key by by factorization of by prime number factorization, which is a quantum computer and minimal algorithm.
You could track it without knowing the public private key very quickly.
You need at least a thousand two bits or maybe many more cubits, but then you need to manage two excellent thousands cubits, so more cubits than these are more states, then we have particles in the observable universe.
So if we take our strongest telescope telescope and all this our galaxy and all the other thousands of galaxies that you can see with our strongest telescope and count how many particles these are, these are less than two excellent
So, so, so two excellent thousands a big number and that's a number we're facing for quantum computers that have the use for register so they need a register for 1000 digits, and we will see a bit later why that's the case but they need big register.
So, so this is this equation is extremely important.
Yes, question.
If I understand correctly, what then the point is because
Okay, just one.
One cubits. If you measure the state of the cubit, you will get a zero one or zero. So basically, no northern hemisphere so yes, all this.
Before you measure it, the state is actually on any of the infinite.
Yes, yes, yes.
You have just one cubit it's kind of useless because anytime it's only always going to be one or two. But when you link to two weeks together you don't have to
basically it can do a computation with any of the infinite values that it has and only after it's done the computation you can measure the result again and comprise it.
And the trick that you are doing and we understand this much better for us that you are using the cubits to perform us in a certain style of calculation using quantum gates, we will see how these words tomorrow.
And then, and you only have to measure out of the many two bits in your register one single one to get all the information you need to solve your problem.
It's so hard so you need to set up. It's very, you need a lot of cleverness you need to set up a mathematical algorithm that allows you to be to be expressed in this amplitude of the of a cubit register.
But at the end can be obtained the critical result but can be obtained with one measurement. And tomorrow we will. There's one very simple algorithm, the Deutsche algorithm which was the first quantum algorithm with which works with with one or two cubits.
We will see tomorrow I forgot it but we will see tomorrow, which which which explains in the principle from which you can understand why it's that such a beautiful speed up.
But this we will look at tomorrow, and then you then you will understand how it works in the same way you understand today, how the logic gates work.
The key is always to to to to make implicit usage of the complexity that this allows, and then, who nevertheless get all the results you need from one or very few measurements.
And this is this is the trick of quantum computing. And of course, he's not only uses superposition but also entanglement.
Entanglement is super important.
For quantum computing so this is the two registers, two bits, a two cubit register was zero one one zero, right, and now an entanglement state business very this is the same way in entanglement then we saw as a photon.
So that we see that it's a mixture of zero one one zero.
And this state cannot be affected into a product of the state of the first and second bit.
This is quantum entanglement and the main foundation for the high efficiency of quantum computing for some problems. So, so not only is the way superposition for men for several cubits important, but also the entanglement.
And here it says, you can't factor it into a product of the state of the first and second bit that that means what I said before, that the projectors are non commuting, because we cannot factor this, this sum into product of the first and second bit.
So this is like the photo entanglement, and these entanglement states are critical are critical for quantum computing, and they give the quantum computers that power.
entanglement is a phenomenon that is not it's in the classical world.
How can you maintain a computer computation.
If you have this kind of entanglement just between two.
So basically, you are, you are, you as we will see in the dodge algorithm, you are making usage of the entanglement for elegant computations.
The problem is, and you was elegant computations that save that save you.
So you are utilizing the entanglement to save computation steps, because such an entanglement in the dodge algorithm, you can do one computation set instead of two, because basically we're operating on the entangled state.
And then when you do the true algorithm, which is, which is quantum free transformation, then you can, then, then it becomes more and more and more efficient.
And so this is what we're going to look at tomorrow, but the entanglement basically allows you, because, because when you, when you create one bit, the other bit gets also automatically entangled, and each computation is a register management.
Right. So when you hear the test, you're sending electrons through the gates, and that creates new form of electrons.
And this is how you manipulate this. This was called a circle.
Right. And at the end, you read out a register that is connected to your circuit to get your, for example, the additional result here, it's different here you are not the quantum circuit consists of a series of manipulation of a register.
And at each, each, and each time you manipulate your register, I mean, manipulate all the tools at the same time.
And, and, and, and that's that's what is what that's if you find an algorithm where this creates less computations that then you have the advantages of the quantum computer and and George was the not a German by the way I think it was an Englishman was the first
in the early nineties to figure out such an algorithm. And then, then in the, in the early 2000s, it was, it was implemented for the first time. And I think that's a paper that I was sent yesterday as answer to my question.
So, so quantum gate is a manipulation of a quantum register.
So, for example, if you have as a quantum, a qubit, the state of an atom, the energy level of an atom, and you know, you have the electrons on the lower on the lower energy levels of the atom, and you shoot with a laser against it will elevate the electrons to a high level.
And that's where you will, you will be able to change the state of, of the, of the, of the quantum bit. And this is, this is, and this is what a quantum operator does it changes the quantum register.
And the quantum gate is so if the quantum register is written as uppercut psi, the quantum register maps this psi to multiplication of, of the operator you with psi.
And so that's the quadratic matrix, which has exactly the same rows and numbers as the qubits of the computer.
So if the computer has two qubits, then the matrix is two times two magic with three qubit three times three and so on. And, and this creates, and these rows and comments are also normal with regard to scalar multiplication.
So, so, so that that's that's it's a quadratic matrix with this property.
And so that, that also means that you can always take it back.
Right, so every quantum operation is reversible because of the unitary nature of the matrix. That means, when you, when you, when you, you apply this to a, to a quantum register, which is a vector of zeros and ones.
So if you have a quadratic matrix to get a result, you can always calculate that.
So look here, for example, on the or, once you have the result that you have a zero or a one, the one can come from three different constellations of the input.
So it's not reverse seven you don't know anymore.
What was it. So, what was the input, and, and the quantum computer.
And the future operation on the quantum register as a unitary operator which is fully reversible.
And, and often normal with regard to mathematically speaking that means it's often almost regard to scalar multiplication.
And so, so the resulting product is still orthogonal.
And, and, and so that means that the resulting in the resulting matrix columns.
The columns are always sorry columns of the, of the matrix are orthogonal so and so linear independent and also normalized.
So, so this is a quantum gates a quantum opera to, to, to repeat it once more we are starting with one qubit.
There's impossibly many states but if you measure it we can get one base data.
Then we have, we have, we take several quantum bits together which we have the quantum register, which is like a vector of zero than one.
And this is an example. This is a two quantum big quantum register with four base states zero zero zero one one zero and one one.
And all the, and the, and the, and this state is like a big training a wave, which is, which is, which is linear combination of those base states.
And this is an entanglement of two base states.
And this is the quantum gate. So unlike here where we have a Julian table that presents what the, what the quantum gate does.
What the logical gate does the quantum gate is like a matrix multiplication.
Matrix multiplication.
So that's the matrix.
Yes.
But, but, but so at the technical level.
Yeah, it's not the component like a circuit but it's like a manipulation of the energy level of the, of one or several of the cubits.
And, and basically what it does it is, it is acting mathematically speaking like a matrix multiplication.
And so here's an example.
So, so this is a negation gate.
So it turns around the state of the of two cubits so if you multiply.
So this is a cubit which is in state one zero, you get out a cubit with a state, sorry, register which is states one and zero, you multiply this then you get out states, you went one.
Yeah, and so, and so.
So we have a superposition time on the basis of zero and one on the two cubit computer.
And now this means that they are linear combinations of alpha times zero plus beta times one.
And you know that zero is in matrix rotation zero is is this.
I think there was always this nice to look it up.
I'm very bad at remembering this was here at the beginning.
Yes.
So zero is this.
And one is this.
Now if you multiply.
If you multiply.
So they're linear combination.
Which is so near.
So if you have alpha times this.
Am I getting this right. Yes, plus beta times this.
So I'm going to get rid of all of this.
That's better times this.
Then this is alpha and zero and bet and zero and better so this alpha beta.
So this is the representation of an arbitrary parametrization of your group it register with two complex numbers.
Now, you can take this and multiply this alpha better times this gate.
Zero one, sorry, it needs to be written down the other way, zero one one zero times alpha better.
Zero times alpha plus one times better is better.
And then the other one is formed.
One times alpha plus zero times better is.
So with with simply made sorry it's a bit covered but I don't have. So I put it back here.
Zero one one zero multiplied by alpha better.
Equals better.
So because because of my reputation right.
And so so this this this military operator does changes the order of the two qubits.
And so this is super important so if you think of quantum computation.
You have this register, and then you have just many, many such military mass which is more like a pack with a register, until you get a certain result of your register.
And then you may have one of the two qubits, and that gives you the result of your entire competition.
The whole computation is just a long life application series of the register with different markets is which represent the quantum games.
That's it. That's what this might have mathematically.
And, and so so this is like comes from that this position to turn by saying zero times alpha plus one times better.
This position is given by one times alpha plus zero times better. That's that's just linear.
And now you can imagine that you have a bigger register now we have big math it says, and they all get multiplied. And after that you get a final result.
And, and now comes interesting question.
So, so from this you see that every quantum computer is just a series of matrix.
So therefore every quantum computer can be simulated by classical computer, because of course the classical computer can also execute but whatever it's not so.
So, so, so it, and, and it's, there are cases where the quantum computer needs and steps.
And the quantum computer, the classical computer needs n sets of quantum computer needs square root of n steps.
For example, if it would need 100 steps, then the quantum computer would need, would need 10, and if it would need 10,000 steps, the quantum computer would just need 100.
This looks pretty good.
Right. The problem is that the quantum computer needs many, many, many more bits than the classical computer to achieve this.
So many more bits that the only computations, the only speed up that is useful to help with the computer computer is this, which is called so this is called for the normal speed up and this is an exponential speed up where you have basically this.
So, so if you have, for example, here to exponent 10 computations, we think eight is 156, nine is 512 so that's 1024.
Here you would only have 10.
This is 100 times speed up. But if you have, let's say, to exponent 12.
That's 4096 computations was a quantum computer you would get down to 12.
You see, that's amazing, right. So here you need 12 computations you need 4000 computations.
That's an exponential speed up. Right now think of, I mean, it gets worse if you think of you need on the classical computer 20 to exponent 100 computations.
That's as many particles as we have in the in the middle way.
Right. So it's a huge set of particles. And now if you do the quantum computer you just have other computations or two to experiment, you just have other computation.
And this is what you basically need for if you want to crack encryption with a quantum computer, you apply the algorithm that achieves a speed up.
And now you see the difference so 100 computations that that can be done, you know, one clock cycle of a quantum computer is is a tense of a millisecond.
So then you can do this in less than a second.
You can do a quantum computer where as you would need to to the exponent 100 can be taken on a regular computer, which takes years, or I don't know thousands of years so so so this show you that an exponential speed up is very very effective.
But even what you see here you understand now that each quantum computer can be can be can be simulated with a with a with a normal computer because it's in the end just a series of matrix modifications.
So today this was more than enough. I'm afraid.
And, and I buried do you